Vikram Duvvur
Schindler
English 333
8 March 2018
Can Bitcoin be Used to Close the Income Gap?

The incessant humming of 25,000 computers fills the air of eight warehouses, 400 miles from Beijing. Performing thousands of calculations per second, fueled on $39,000 dollars’ worth of electricity a day, this facility mines Bitcoin, a digital currency (Woon). Mining a currency seems like an odd phrase, but it is a surprisingly good analogy, because miners guess random numbers in hopes they will metaphorically strike gold by finding a Bitcoin. Bitcoin’s creator or creators go by the pseudonymous name of Satoshi Nakamoto, contributing a sense of mystery to Bitcoin’s creation. Many people do not use digital currencies because they are risky investments, not accepted as payment in many places, complex in nature, they have a murky background, and if hacked, result in an irrecoverable loss of all funds. People are concerned with the ephemeral nature of Bitcoin, because unlike paper currency, no major government has agreed to accept Bitcoin as a valid form of payment for as long as the government exists. This distributed authority model, where millions of people have power as opposed to just one group, has the potential to reduce income inequality by spreading power and control among more people, without it being subject to fees and regulations of a central body. With proper information distribution, Bitcoin can reduce inequality between nations by increasing the wealth of citizens of underdeveloped countries through access to a stable world-wide currency, and access to loans.
A blockchain network, the system underpinning Bitcoin, is similar to the relationships a small village. Both involve a closely intertwined group of people connected through the internet. In our example village, we will have ten people who each have unique skills. Each evening, they gather in the village square and form a circle. Two of them get in the middle of the circle and promise to exchange services, such as repairing a roof in exchange for digging a well the following day. The other eight people carve the agreement into a thin block of wood. When they get home, they place their new block on top of their carved blocks from previous days to record agreements. In blockchain’s peer-to-peer system of recording transactions, there is no central authority that records the transactions; therefore, it is impossible for any one person to steal or double spend money. Any disagreement about an agreement can be easily resolved by looking at everyone’s carved blocks. Another benefit of a lack of a central authority, like in the situation described above, is the absence of fees characteristic of modern financial institutions, such as withdrawal fees, maintenance fees, and low balance fees. Blockchain technology allows the village scenario to operate around the globe through the internet. Like the villagers inside the circle, two parties agree to exchange a virtual currency called Bitcoin in return for something of value, which can range from services to paper currencies. When two parties make an agreement, computers around the world record the trade on a virtual “block,” as Bitcoin creator Satoshi Nakamoto explains. In the case of Bitcoin, blocks contain information about who spent the money, who the money went to, and how much money was transferred. The blocks are appended to the previous blocks akin to new carved blocks being stacked on each other. The carved block stack represents a collection of blocks, known as a blockchain which is maintained by users’ computers across the internet. This means no dedicated servers are necessary apart from the users’ computers, which means blockchain can operate without any running fees for the starting company. These block stacks, or “distributed ledgers,” maintain identical copies of transactions across a network (Nakamoto). In this way, blockchain solves many of the problems and annoyances that plague the users of centralized financial systems such as disputed transactions, withdrawal fees, and dependence on a central authority to ensure everything is happening properly.
Developed countries use many forms of payment, including cash, check, and credit card. As journalist Kashmir Hill suggests, cash is “one of society’s oldest and most important inventions” (1). Before cash, a bartering system existed where people directly exchanged products or services. Eventually, people decided to establish a system where a standardized object, such as a coin, represented an agreed-upon value that could be easily traded and stored. To preserve cash’s new value, central authorities were established and responsible for controlling the amount of currency in circulation. Even today, the United States’ central banking system, called the Federal Reserve, “ensure[s] adequate supply of paper currency around the country” (2). Some of the disadvantages of cash are that it can be stolen or destroyed, devalued by the issuing body, and cumbersome to use because of storage; however, a founding principle of Bitcoin is that no one central body should have the power to reduce users of a currencies’ wealth. To make it easier to transfer cash over long distances, an automated checking system was established. Checks still have some disadvantages. They are relatively easy to forge, by changing the beneficiary’s name or value transferred. A central banking institution manages all checks, which serves to concentrate power in one location. Amar Duvvur also explains that, “Checks have also failed to keep up with the speed required for modern businesses to operate, because it takes multiple days for a check to process.” Bitcoin’s instantaneous, decentralized, and secure money transfer was meant to ensure Bitcoin did not suffer from the drawbacks of checks (Duvvur). As financial systems of countries grew more complex and interconnected, cash needed to be transferred more quickly. Credit cards were born this necessity. To make money, credit card companies force users to borrow credit from them whenever you use your card, and they have the opportunity to repay the credit card company at the end of the month. An additional feature of a credit card is that a user can borrow money from the credit card company, at a high interest rate, and promise to pay it back in the future. While credit cards may seem incredibly useful, they still have a few drawbacks. While the ease of swiping a card may not initially seem like a disadvantage, people are sometimes unaware of how large a sum of money is when they charge their card. If people’s money is not physical dollars and coins, people tend to lose track of their cumulative spending. Oh the other hand, whenever people take out cash from a wallet, they understand how much money they spend much better after each transaction. Another common drawback is the illusion of free money, because when users buy goods, their bank account balance does not go down. This illusion is particularly dangerous when coupled with the high interest rates credit card companies charge, averaging 12.51 percent per month (Value Penguin). Currently credit cards are the most used form of credit transfer of the three non-cash transfer discussed above in the United States (Federal Reserve 6). Digital currencies, such as Bitcoin, are the newest method of transferring credit, which is different from the other three payment methods, because of the lack of having a central authority to regulate prices, add more currency, or record transactions. Bitcoin’s decentralized principles make it difficult to any one person or group of people gain to control of the digital currency. By giving more people the ability to exchange goods and services across a greater number of people, the wealth of a country also increases, because the wealth of a country is determined by the wealth of its citizens.
	Peace Akware, a 30 year-old Ugandan, has recently joined the world of digital currencies. She explained to BBC that she has invested more than $1,000 in Bitcoin. So far, she has seen a substantial increase in her digital earnings, which if properly invested, could be used to improve her socioeconomic status. Investing in higher education, for example, would allow her to apply for better-paying jobs and make more money in the cutthroat Ugandan job market, which can be reinvested in Bitcoin. Peace’s story is one of thousands whose life has improved through the introduction of Bitcoin into their countries (BBC). According to an African Bitcoin change analyst, South Africa has seen a 671 percent increase in usage from January to the end of November last year (Lielacher). Elizabeth Rossiello, the CEO of a company that lets people use Bitcoin to transfer cash across borders, explains that “Bitcoin has become a place to store value, buy goods and services from abroad and crucially a vehicle for remittances from the diaspora” (BBC). Rossiello explains that Bitcoin is a secure place to store money, a convenience most people take for granted. Saving money is important, because it allows people to provide for future needs such as retirement, healthcare emergencies, or education for their children. The World Bank estimates two billion people lack, primarily in Latin America, Asia, and Africa, lack access to a transaction account (World Bank). A Bitcoin wallet, a virtual place to store money, can be created using any device capable of connecting to the internet. Internet access in these regions has been rapidly increasing, and if the upward trend continues, more and more people will have the opportunity to create and use a Bitcoin wallet at little to no cost. Developing countries with access to Bitcoin have a dependable currency that they can use to engage in international trade. Millions of Venezuelans have taken to trading Bitcoin, because their currency, the bolívar, has an inflation rate of almost 1,600 percent making it’s practically useless. Bitcoin also allows Venezuelans to have a steady source of income by mining Bitcoin, and gives them an opportunity to order things like food, diapers, and insulin online (Chun). Critics such as economist Stephen Kinsella may argue that a major drawback of Bitcoin is that, “Bitcoin has no use value, only exchange value, and because it has no worth in use other than what others are willing to pay for it, it is always in a bubble: these happen when prices of assets get dislodged from their fundamental value.” He argues that the only real value Bitcoin has is the electricity consumed to mine it, however that is negligible. This means Bitcoin’s price is primarily determined by what people are willing to pay for it in terms of other currencies, also known as its exchange rate (Whelan). Bitcoin exchanges allow people to convert paper currencies to Bitcoin and vice versa. Each Bitcoin exchange sets its own price, based off of a variety of factors such as liquidity or governmental regulation that scares people away from investing (Bradbury). Bitcoin’s high volatility is a result of its decentralized nature. As more people adopt Bitcoin, the volatility will naturally be reduced because everyone will have a greater stake in the cryptocurrency lessening the impact of individual people.
	Integrating digital currencies may require treading on some of the founding principles of Bitcoin, by creating an international oversight body dedicated to educating and promoting the use of Bitcoin. Some countries are quick to adopt new technologies, while other that take more time can be assisted by training and educating citizens on how to safely use digital currencies. There will likely have to be some infrastructure changes, because Bitcoin transactions require an internet connection through a mobile device or computer. About half the population of the world does not have access to the internet; however, in the past 18 years, internet access has grown more than 1000 percent worldwide, and this increase in usage will likely continue in the coming decades (Miniwatts). Individuals who currently store wealth in assets such as property, livestock, or physical currency may be reluctant to trade their real assets for virtual currency, taking a massive leap of faith. However, with proper assurance and education, they may be more willing to adopting virtual currency as a means of saving. Adoption of Bitcoin is already happening in developed markets as Kashmir Hill, a writer for Popular Science, proved with her experiences in San Francisco. San Francisco is a relatively technologically savvy city, drawing much of its technological expertise from the nearby Silicon Valley. In 2013, she attempted to pay for all her needs for a week with nothing other than Bitcoin. She could only pay for a limited number of things, she was able to buy food from a few local businesses that accepted Bitcoin, but she could not pay her rent or transportation fees with the digital currency. When she retried her experiment in 2014, however, she was able to pay for more things, even paying for a wine tour with the digital currency (Hill).
	Bitcoin, by itself, may not have the potential to reduce inequality among nations. One way to increase the possibility of including economically marginalized peoples in the world to use Bitcoin as a tool to increase personal and national wealth, is to create an organization dedicated to informing people about the benefits, risks, and technological aspects of Bitcoin. While this centralized organization chips away at the founding principles of Bitcoin – centralized institutions should not be necessary – such an organization would help facilitate the access and use of Bitcoin. One responsibility of this hypothesized organization would be to teach people about the technical aspects of Bitcoin, in order to reassure people, who don’t use technology in their daily lives, that their money is safe and that they are not getting scammed. Another responsibility of a Bitcoin information organization would be to educate people on the benefits and potential risks of Bitcoin. This organization could also help coordinate national governments’ policy regarding Bitcoin to keep the price relatively stable and ensured that Bitcoin is taxed as a digital currency in countries. When the government of a populous country is unsure of future policies regarding Bitcoin, like China did in 2014, Bitcoin’s price can fall, jeopardizing others’ investments like in 2014 where it dropped by almost a fifth of its value (Rizzo).  If we establish an organization dedicated to spreading information about Bitcoin, then Bitcoin has the opportunity to reduce inequality around the world. (Possibly include a real-life example?)
